Docs: Add OVN network developer documentation (#14556)
canonical/lxd: lxd/network/openvswitch/docs/developer-documentation.md

We need to translate networking concepts in LXD to their OVN analogue and instruct OVN directly, at a low level, what to do.

This document outlines LXD's approach to OVN in a basic setup.
It does not yet cover load-balancers, peering, forwards, zones, or ACLs.

For more detailed documentation on OVN itself, please see:
1. [Overview of OVN and SDNs](https://ubuntu.com/blog/data-centre-networking-what-is-ovn).
2. [OVN architectural overview](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/man7/ovn-architecture.7.html).
3. [OVN northbound database schema documentation](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/en/man5/ovn-nb.5.html).
4. [OVN southbound database schema documentation](https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/jammy/en/man5/ovn-sb.5.html).

## OVN concepts
This section outlines the OVN concepts that we use in LXD.
These are usually represented in tables in the OVN northbound database.

### Chassis
A chassis is where traffic physically ingresses to or egresses from the virtual network.
In LXD, there will usually be one chassis per cluster member.
If LXD is configured to use OVN networking, then all members *can* be used as OVN chassis.

> > If any cluster members have the role `ovn-chassis`, only those members will be represented as chassis in the chassis group table (see below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If any cluster members have the role `ovn-chassis`, only those members are represented as chassis in the chassis group table (see below).
```

> > If no members have the role, all cluster members will be added to the chassis group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If no members have the role, all cluster members are added to the chassis group.
```

### OVS (OpenVSwitch) Bridge
OVS bridges are used to connect virtual networks to physical ones and vice-versa.

> In LXD, if OpenVSwitch APIs are invoked directly, that means changes are being applied on the same physical cluster member.

Author: I'll perhaps change this to be `the daemon host`

For each LXD cluster member there are two OVS bridges:
1. The uplink bridge - this connects the uplink network on the host to the external switch inside each OVN network.
2. The integration bridge - this connects instances to the internal switch inside each OVN network.

### Chassis group
A chassis group is an indirection between physical chassis and the virtual networks that use them.
Each LXD OVN network has one chassis group.
This allows us to, for example, set chassis priority on a per-network basis so that not all ingress/egress is happening on a single cluster member.

### OVN underlay
The OVN underlay is the means by which networks are virtualized across cluster members.
It is a Geneve tunnel which creates a layer 2 overlay network across layer 3 infrastructure.
The OVN underlay is configured and managed by OVN.

### Logical router
A logical router is a virtualized router.
There is one per LXD OVN network.
This handles L3 networking and additionally has associated NAT rules and security policies.

### Logical switch

> Logical routers cannot be directly connected to OVS bridges; for this we use a logical switch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logical routers cannot be directly connected to OVS bridges; for this, we use a logical switch.
```

There are two logical switches per LXD OVN network:

> - The external switch, which is between the logical router and the chassis group (which indirects the to uplink bridge, which may be on another cluster member).

Reviewer 2: "the to uplink"?

Author: Hmm yeah I meant uplink bridge here to mean the OVS bridge that sits before the uplink network.

> - The external switch, which is between the logical router and the chassis group (which indirects the to uplink bridge, which may be on another cluster member).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The external switch, which is between the logical router and the chassis group. This switch indirects to the OVS bridge that sits before the uplink network. The OVS bridge can be on a different cluster member.
```

Reviewer: Also - "...can be on a different cluster member" is unclear to me. What is it different from?

Author: I've reworded this section.

> - The internal switch, which is between the logical router and the integration bridge. This switch contains DHCP and IP allocation configuration.

Author: As far as I can tell in the OVN driver `setup(update bool)` function, IP allocation and DHCP configuration is set on the internal switch. IPv6 advertisements are set on the port. Perhaps I'm interpreting wrong?

> - The internal switch, which is between the logical router and the integration bridge. This switch contains DHCP and IP allocation configuration.

Author: No not quite. There are two logical switches per LXD OVN network. The external switch is used to connect the OVS bridge that is connected to the uplink network. The internal switch is used to connect instances. There is only one internal switch, but there are multiple ports connected to the internal switch, which instances are connected to via the integration bridge.

> - The internal switch, which is between the logical router and the integration bridge. This switch contains DHCP and IP allocation configuration.

Reviewer 2: > The external switch is used to connect the OVS bridge that is connected to the uplink network

Not quite.

The external (logical) switch is used to connect the provider OVS bridge to the OVN (logical) router's external port.

The uplink network itself is connected to the provider OVS bridge, so the flow is like this:

uplink network parent interface <-> provider OVS switch <-> external (OVN logical) switch port <-> external (OVN logical) switch <-> external (OVN logical) router port <-> router (OVN logical) <-> internal (OVN logical) router port <-> internal (OVN logical) switch <-> internal (OVN logical) switch ports <-> integration OVS bridge <-> Instance interfaces

### Logical switch/router ports

> In OVN, when you create a router or switch it doesn't initially have any ports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you create a router or switch in OVN, it doesn't initially have any ports.
```

> You need to create ports and then link them.

Reviewer: Is this true in LXD's implementation of OVN? That is, when you create an OVN network in LXD, does LXD configure the ports automatically or do they need to be manually configured?

Reviewer 2: These docs are not about LXD's OVN networks per-se, its about how LXD OVN networks are built using OVN. So its important to note here that this isn't necessarily for end users (unless they are interested in how LXD configures OVN).

It is true that OVN's routers dont have ports until they are added, and this is why LXD's OVN implementation adds them on the users behalf as part of its opinionated setup.

Shall we move this into the https://documentation.ubuntu.com/lxd/en/latest/internals/ section of the docs btw?

For example, the internal logical switch and the logical router for a LXD OVN network are connected by:
1. Adding a logical router port to the logical router.
2. Adding a logical switch port to the internal logical switch.
3. Configuring the internal logical switch port as a router port and setting the logical router name.

Some configuration is applied directly at port level.
For example, in a LXD OVN network, IPv6 router advertisement settings are applied on the logical router port for the internal switch.
This is by design. It allows OVN to push configuration down to the port level so that packets are handled as quickly as possible.

### Port groups

> When an instance is attached via the integration bridge to the internal switch of a LXD OVN network, the logical switch port that is created is added to the port group for that network.

Author: Yep it's two stages but only want to highlight the port group here. Maybe I can re-word it to:

> When a LXD OVN network is created a port group will be created that is namespaced to that network. When instances are connected to the network, logical switch ports are created for them on the internal switch. These logical switch ports are added to the port group for the network.

> When an instance is attached via the integration bridge to the internal switch of a LXD OVN network, the logical switch port that is created is added to the port group for that network.

Reviewer 2: yeah sounds better as nothing to do with integration bridge.
Can you avoid "namespaced" though, as that has connotations for Linux namespaces, can we just say "specific"?

> This is used for ACL configuration so that rules can be applied on the whole address set rather than individual ports.

Reviewer 2: whole address? whole network right?

Reviewer 3: whole address *set*, but probably network is more accurate.

Reviewer 3: whole address **set**, but probably network is more accurate.

Author: I got this terminology from the OVN northbound DB schema docs. A port group can be used in a `match` rule for the ACL table, as can address sets. When a port group is created or modified, entries in the `Address_Set` table are automatically populated. So using `Port_Groups` simplifies management of ACLs.

I struggled to put that into words :laughing:

Reviewer: I suggest preceding this sentence with a brief description of the phrase "address set" as used in OVN.

Reviewer 2: ah i missed the "set" parse as i skimmed it.

## OVN Uplink

> There are three kinds of uplink configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three types of uplink configurations.
```

Reviewer 2: My only word of caution here is that using "types" suggests that LXD will have a documented (and displayed) understanding of these "types" of configurations (like other sorts of "types" we have), where as this is not the case. LXD will detect the environment of the uplink network and do what is needed to connect it to the OVN space.

Of the three, it is only recommended to use physical networks for production.
Any necessary resources for the uplink are created on network start. Networks are usually started immediately after they are created.

### Bridge (OpenVSwitch)

> A user may separately configure an OpenVSwitch bridge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user can separately configure an OpenVSwitch bridge.
```

An OVN network can be created with `network` set to the OVS bridge.

> LXD will configure a bridge mapping on it to connect the OVN network:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LXD configures a bridge mapping on the OVS bridge to connect the OVN network:
```

![Uplink OVS](ovn-uplink-ovs.png)

### Physical
An OVN network can be created with `network` set to a physical network, where the physical network is essentially a database entry in LXD that tells it how to interact with an actual `parent` network device.
In this case, an OVS bridge is created automatically.
A bridge port connects the OVS bridge to the parent. 
A bridge mapping is used (as above) to connect the OVS bridge to the OVN network.

![Physical uplink diagram](ovn-uplink-physical.png)

> Note: When using a physical network as an uplink for OVN, any IP addresses on the parent interface will become defunct.

> > It is a requirement that the parent network should have no network configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The parent network must not have any assigned IP addresses .
```

### Bridge (native)

> A native Linux bridge can also be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A native Linux bridge can be used.
```

> In this case we perform the same steps as in the physical network and additionally configure a veth pair.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, we perform the same steps as in the physical network and additionally configure a veth pair.
```

> The veth pair is used so that the bridge can still be used for other purposes (i.e. it will maintain it's configuration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The veth pair is used so that the bridge can still be used for other purposes (since the bridge maintains its configuration).
```

This is handy for development and testing but is not performant and should not be used in production.

![uplink native bridge](ovn-uplink-bridge.png)

## OVN Network
In the simplest case, a LXD OVN network has the below configuration:

![LXD OVN network diagram](ovn-network.png)

> Note: This diagram does not show cross-cluster networks.

> > This conceptual diagram should look this same on all cluster members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This conceptual diagram should look the same on all cluster members.
```

> > If the chassis group prioritises another chassis for the uplink, the traffic will be routed to the other member by means that we don't need to worry about.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If the chassis group prioritizes another chassis for the uplink, the traffic is routed to that chassis by means beyond the scope of this document.
```

Reviewer: (or just stop the sentence at "... routed to that chassis."

## Integration bridge
The cluster setting `network.ovn.integration_bridge` must contain the name of an OVS bridge that is used to connect instances to an OVN network via a NIC device. This OVS bridge must be pre-configured on all cluster members with the same name. 

> Connectivity to the integration bridge differs between containers and virtual machines. See below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connectivity to the integration bridge differs between containers and virtual machines:
```
